# Chapter 17: Cash

17
Cash
17.1 Generalities
Cash is an asset, albeit at times its function as an asset might be overlooked
or taken for granted. As an asset, cash can be used in a variety of ways, e.g.,
(i) as a risk management tool , as it can help mitigate drawdowns and volatility;
(ii) as an opportunity management tool , as it allows to take advantage of speciﬁc
or unusual situations; and (iii) as a liquidity management tool in unexpected
situations that require liquid funds. There are several ways to include liquid
funds in a portfolio, e.g., via U.S. T reasury bills, bank deposit certiﬁcates
(CDs), commercial paper, banker’s acceptances, eurodollars, and repurchase
agreements (a.k.a. repos), etc. 1
17.2 Strategy: Money Laundering—The Dark
Side of Cash
Money laundering, broadly, is an activity wherein cash is used as a vehicle
to transform illegal proﬁts into legitimate-appearing assets. There are three
main steps in a money laundering process. The ﬁrst and the riskiest step is
the placement, whereby illegal funds are introduced into the legal economy via
fraudulent means, e.g., by dividing funds into small amounts and depositing
them into multiple bank accounts thereby avoiding detection. The second step,
layering, involves moving the money around between different accounts and
1For some literature, see, e.g., Cook and LaRoche ( 1993), Cook and Rowe ( 1986), Damiani ( 2012),
Duchin ( 2010), Goodfriend ( 2011), Schaede ( 1990), Summers ( 1980), Ysmailov ( 2017).
© The Author(s) 2018
Z. Kakushadze and J. A. Serur, 151 T rading Strategies,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02792-6_17
241

242 Z. Kakushadze and J. A. Serur
even countries thereby creating complexity and separating the money from its
source by several degrees. The third step is integration, whereby money laun-
derers get back the money via legitimate-looking sources, e.g., cash-intensive
businesses such as bars and restaurants, car washes, hotels (at least in some
countries), gambling establishments, parking garages, etc. 2
17.3 Strategy: Liquidity Management
From a portfolio management perspective, this strategy amounts to optimally
deﬁning the amount of cash to be held in the portfolio to meet liquidity
demands generated by unforeseen events. 3 Cash provides immediate liquidity,
whereas other assets would have to be liquidated ﬁrst, which can be associated
with substantial transaction costs, especially if liquidation is abrupt. 4 From
a corporate perspective, holding cash can be a precautionary measure aimed
at avoiding cash ﬂow shortfalls that can yield, inter alia, loss of investment
opportunities, ﬁnancial distress, etc. 5
17.4 Strategy: Repurchase Agreement (REPO)
A repurchase agreement (REPO) is a cash-equivalent asset that provides imme-
diate liquidity at a preset interest rate for a speciﬁc period of time in exchange
for another asset used as a collateral. A reverse repurchase agreement is the
opposite. So, a REPO strategy amounts to borrowing (lending) cash with
2For some literature, see, e.g., Ardizzi et al. ( 2014), Cox ( 2015), Gilmour and Ridley ( 2015), Hopton
(1999), John and Brigitte ( 2009), Kumar ( 2012), Levi and Reuter ( 2006), Schneider and Windischbauer
(2008), Seymour ( 2008), Soudijn ( 2016), Walker ( 1999), Wright et al. ( 2017).
3Note that this is not necessarily the same reason for holding cash as that behind Kelly strategies. For
some pertinent literature, see, e.g., Browne ( 2000), Cover ( 1984), Davis and Lleo ( 2012), Hsieh and
Barmish ( 2015), Hsieh et al. ( 2016), Kelly ( 1956) ,L a u r e t ie ta l .( 2010), Lo et al. ( 2017), Maslov and
Zhang (1998), Nekrasov ( 2014), Rising and Wyner ( 2012), Samuelson ( 1971), Thorp ( 2006), Thorp and
Kassouf ( 1967).
4For some literature, see, e.g., Agapova ( 2011b), Aragon et al. ( 2017), Cao et al. ( 2013), Chernenko
and Sunderam ( 2016), Connor and Leland ( 1995), Jiang et al. ( 2017), Kruttli et al. ( 2018), Leland and
Connor ( 1995), Simutin ( 2014), Yan ( 2006).
5For some literature on corporate aspects of liquidity management and related topics, see, e.g., Acharya
et al. ( 2007), Almeida et al. ( 2005), Azmat and Iqbal ( 2017), Chidambaran et al. ( 2001), Disatnik et al.
(2014), Froot et al. ( 1993), Han and Qiu ( 2007), Opler et al. ( 1999), Sher ( 2014).

17 Cash 243
interest in exchange for securities with the commitment of repurchasing them
from (reselling them to) the counterparty. This type of a transaction typically
s p a n sf r o m1d a yt o6m o n t h s .6
17.5 Strategy: Pawnbroking
REPOs are in some sense similar to much more ancient pawnbroking strategies.
A pawnbroker extends a secured cash loan with pre-agreed interest and period
(which can sometimes be extended). The loan is secured with a collateral, which
is some valuable item(s), such as jewelry, electronics, vehicles, rare books or
musical instruments, etc. If the loan is not repaid with interest as agreed, then
the collateral is forfeited by the borrower and the pawnbroker can keep it or
sell it. The amount of loan typically is at a signiﬁcant discount to the appraised
value of the collateral.
7
17.6 Strategy: Loan Sharking
Unlike pawnbroking, loan sharking in many jurisdictions is illegal. Loan shark-
ing consists of offering a loan at excessively high interest rates. Such a loan is
not necessarily secured by a collateral. Instead, a loan shark can sometimes
resort to blackmail and/or violence to enforce the terms of a loan (see, e.g.,
Aldohni 2013).
References
Acharya, V . V ., Almeida, H., & Campello, M. (2007). Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedg-
ing Perspective on Corporate Financial Policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation ,
16 (4), 515–554.
Adrian, T ., Begalle, B., Copeland, A., & Martin, A. (2013). Repo and Secu-
rities Lending (Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 529).
Available online: https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_
reports/sr529.pdf .
6See, e.g., Adrian et al. ( 2013), Bowsher ( 1979), Dufﬁe ( 1996), Garbade ( 2004), Gorton and Metrick
(2012), Happ ( 1986), Kraenzlin ( 2007), Lumpkin ( 1987), Ruchin ( 2011), Schatz ( 2012), Simmons
(1954), Sollinger ( 1994), Zhang et al. ( 2018).
7In Sect. 9 we discussed trading strategies based on commodity futures. Pawnbrokers, among other things,
trade physical commodities such as silver and gold. For some literature on pawnbroking and related topics,
see, e.g., Bos et al. ( 2012), Bouman and Houtman ( 1988), Caskey ( 1991), D’Este (2014), Fass and Francis
(2004), Maaravi and Levy ( 2017), McCants ( 2007), Shackman and T enney ( 2006), Zhou et al. ( 2016).

244 Z. Kakushadze and J. A. Serur
Agapova, A. (2011). The Role of Money Market Mutual Funds in Mutual Fund
Families. Journal of Applied Finance , 21(1), 87–102.
Aldohni, A. K. (2013). Loan Sharks v. Short-T erm Lenders: How Do the Law and
Regulators Draw the Line? Journal of Law and Society, 40 (3), 420–449.
Almeida, H., Campello, M., & Weisbach, M. S. (2005). The Cash Flow Sensitivity
of Cash. Journal of Finance , 59(4), 1777–1804.
Aragon, G. O., Ergun, A. T ., Getmansky, M., & Girardi, G. (2017). Hedge
Fund Liquidity Management (Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3033930.
Ardizzi, G., Petraglia, C., Piacenza, M., Schneider, F ., & T urati, G. (2014). Money
Laundering as a Crime in the Financial Sector: A New Approach to Quantitative
Assessment, with an Application to Italy. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking ,
46 (8), 1555–1590.
Azmat, Q., & Iqbal, A. M. (2017). The Role of Financial Constraints on Precau-
tionary Cash Holdings: Evidence from Pakistan. Economic Research—Ekonomska
Istraživanja, 30(1), 596–610.
Bos, M., Carter, S., & Skiba, P . M. (2012). The Pawn Industry and Its Customers:
The United States and Europe (Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2149575.
Bouman, F . J. A., & Houtman, R. (1988). Pawnbroking as an Instrument of Rural
Banking in the Third World. Economic Development and Cultural Change , 37 (1),
69–89.
Bowsher, N. (1979). Repurchase Agreements. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,
61(9), 17–22.
Browne, S. (2000). Risk-Constrained Dynamic Active Portfolio Management. Man-
agement Science , 46 (9), 1188–1199.
Cao, C., Chen, Y., Liang, B., & Lo, A. W . (2013). Can Hedge Funds Time Market
Liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics , 109(2), 493–516.
Caskey, J. P . (1991). Pawnbroking in America: The Economics of a Forgotten Credit
Market. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 23(1), 85–99.
Chernenko, S., & Sunderam, A. (2016). LiquidityT ransformation in Asset Management:
Evidence from the Cash Holdings of Mutual Funds (Working Paper). Available online:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22391.
Chidambaran, N. K., Fernando, C. S., & Spindt, P . A. (2001). Credit Enhance-
ment Through Financial Engineering: Freeport McMoRan’s Gold-Denominated
Depositary Shares. Journal of Financial Economics , 60(2–3), 487–528.
Connor, G., & Leland, H. (1995). Cash Management for Index T racking. Financial
Analysts Journal, 51(6), 75–80.
Cook, T . Q., & LaRoche, R. B. (Eds.). (1993). Instruments of the Money Market (7th
ed.). Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Cook, T . Q., & Rowe, T . D. (Eds.). (1986). Instruments of the Money Market (6th
ed.). Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Cover, T . M. (1984). An Algorithm for Maximizing Expected Log Investment Return.
IEEE T ransactions on Information Theory
, 30(2), 369–373.

17 Cash 245
Cox, D. (2015). Handbook of Anti Money Laundering . Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Damiani, D. (2012). The Case for Cash. CFA Institute Magazine , 23(4), 8–9.
Davis, M., & Lleo, S. (2012). Fractional Kelly Strategies in Continuous Time: Recent
Developments. In L. C. MacLean & W . Ziemba (Eds.), Handbook of the Funda-
mentals of Financial Decision Making . Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing.
D’Este, R. (2014). The Effect of Stolen Goods Markets on Crime: Evidence from a Quasi-
Natural Experiment (Working Paper). Available online: https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/
soc/economics/research/workingpapers/2014/twerp_1040b_deste.pdf .
Disatnik, D., Duchin, R., & Schmidt, B. (2014). Cash Flow Hedging and Liquidity
Choices. Review of Finance , 18(2), 715–748.
Duchin, R. (2010). Cash Holdings and Corporate Diversiﬁcation. Journal of Finance ,
65(3), 955–992.
Dufﬁe, D. (1996). Special Repo Rates. Journal of Finance , 51(2), 493–526.
Fass, S. M., & Francis, J. (2004). Where Have All the Hot Goods Gone? The Role of
Pawnshops. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency , 41(2), 156–179.
Froot, K. A., Scharfstein, D. S., & Stein, J. C. (1993). Risk Management: Coordinating
Corporate Investment and Financing Policies. Journal of Finance , 48(5), 1629–
1658.
Garbade, K. D. (2004). Origins of the Federal Reserve Book-Entry System. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review , 10(3), 33–50.
Gilmour, N., & Ridley, N. (2015). Everyday Vulnerabilities—Money Laundering
Through Cash Intensive Businesses. Journal of Money Laundering Control , 18(3),
293–303.
Goodfriend, M. (2011). Money Markets. Annual Review of Financial Economics , 3,
119–1137.
Gorton, G., & Metrick, A. (2012). Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo. Journal
of Financial Economics , 104 (3), 425–451.
Han, S., & Qiu, J. (2007). Corporate Precautionary Cash Holdings. Journal of Cor-
porate Finance, 13(1), 43–57.
Happ, S. (1986). The Behavior of Rates on Federal Funds and Repurchase Agreements.
American Economist, 30(2), 22–32.
Hopton, D. (1999). Prevention of Money Laundering: The Practical Day-to-Day
Problems and Some Solutions. Journal of Money Laundering Control , 2(3), 249–
252.
Hsieh, C. H., & Barmish, B. R. (2015). On Kelly Betting: Some Limitations. Pro-
ceeding of the 53rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and
Computing (pp. 165–172). Washington, DC: IEEE.
Hsieh, C. H., Barmish, B. R., & Gubner, J. A. (2016). Kelly Betting Can Be T oo
Conservative. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Decision and Control (CDC)
(pp. 3695–3701). Washington, DC: IEEE.
Jiang, H., Li, D., & Wang, A. (2017).
Dynamic Liquidity Management by Cor-
porate Bond Mutual Funds (Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2776829.

246 Z. Kakushadze and J. A. Serur
John, W ., & Brigitte, U. (2009). Measuring Global Money Laundering: “The Walker
Gravity Model”. Review of Law & Economics , 5(2), 821–853.
Kelly, J. L. (1956). A New Interpretation of Information Rate. Bell System T echnical
Journal, 35(4), 917–926.
Kraenzlin, S. (2007). The Characteristics and Development of the Swiss Franc Repur-
chase Agreement Market. Financial Markets and Portfolio Management , 21(2), 241–
261.
Kruttli, M., Monin, P ., & Watugala, S. W . (2018). Investor Concentration, Flows,
and Cash Holdings: Evidence from Hedge Funds (Working Paper). Available online:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3031663.
Kumar, V . A. (2012). Money Laundering: Concept, Signiﬁcance and Its Impact. Euro-
pean Journal of Business and Management , 4 (2), 113–119.
Laureti, P ., Medo, M., & Zhang, Y.-C. (2010). Analysis of Kelly-Optimal Portfolios.
Quantitative Finance , 10(7), 689–697.
Leland, H., & Connor, G. (1995). Optimal Cash Management for Investment Funds
(Research Program in Finance Working Papers, No. RPF-244). Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley.
Levi, M., & Reuter, P . (2006). Money Laundering. Crime and Justice, 34 (1), 289–375.
Lo, A. W ., Orr, A., & Zhang, R. (2017). The Growth of Relative Wealth and the Kelly
Criterion (Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2900509.
Lumpkin, S. A. (1987). Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreements. Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Review , 73(1), 15–23.
Maaravi, Y., & Levy, A. (2017). When Your Anchor Sinks Your Boat: Information
Asymmetry in Distributive Negotiations and the Disadvantage of Making the First
Offer. Judgment and Decision Making , 12(5), 420–429.
Maslov, S., & Zhang, Y.-C. (1998). Optimal Investment Strategy for Risky Assets.
International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 1(3), 377–387.
McCants, A. (2007). Goods at Pawn: The Overlapping Worlds of Material Possessions
and Family Finance in Early Modern Amsterdam. Social Science History , 31(2),
213–238.
Nekrasov, V . (2014).Kelly Criterion for Multivariate Portfolios: A Model-Free Approach
(Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2259133.
Opler, T ., Pinkowitz, L., Stulz, R., & Williamson, R. (1999). The Determinants and
Implications of Corporate Cash Holdings. Journal of Financial Economics , 52(1),
3–46.
Rising, J. K., & Wyner, A. J. (2012). Partial Kelly Portfolios and Shrinkage Estimators.
In Proceedings of the 2012 International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)
(pp. 1618–1622). Washington, DC: IEEE.
Ruchin, A. (2011). Can Securities Lending T ransactions Substitute for Repurchase
Agreement T ransactions? Banking Law Journal , 128(5), 450–480.
Samuelson, P . (1971). The “fallacy” of Maximizing the Geometric Mean in Long
Sequences of Investing or Gambling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,
68(10), 2493–2496.

17 Cash 247
Schaede, U. (1990). The Introduction of Commercial Paper—A Case Study in the
Liberalisation of the Japanese Financial Markets. Japan Forum, 2(2), 215–234.
Schatz, H. R. (2012). The Characterization of Repurchase Agreements in the Context
of the Federal Securities Laws. St. John ’s Law Review, 61(2), 290–310.
Schneider, F ., & Windischbauer, U. (2008). Money Laundering: Some Facts. European
Journal of Law and Economics , 26 (3), 387–404.
Seymour, B. (2008). Global Money Laundering. Journal of Applied Security Research ,
3(3–4), 373–387.
Shackman, J. D., & T enney, G. (2006). The Effects of Government Regulations on
the Supply of Pawn Loans: Evidence from 51 Jurisdictions in the US. Journal of
Financial Services Research , 30(1), 69–91.
Sher, G. (2014). Cashing in for Growth: Corporate Cash Holdings as an Opportu-
nity for Investment in Japan (Working Paper). Available online: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2561246.
Simmons, E. (1954). Sales of Government Securities to Federal Reserve Banks Under
Repurchase Agreements. Journal of Finance , 9(1), 23–40.
Simutin, M. (2014). Cash Holdings and Mutual Fund Performance. Review of Finance,
18(4), 1425–1464.
Sollinger, A. (1994). The T riparty Is Just Beginning. Institutional Investor, 28(1), 133–
135.
Soudijn, M. R. J. (2016). Rethinking Money Laundering and Drug T rafﬁcking: Some
Implications for Investigators, Policy Makers and Researchers. Journal of Money
Laundering Control , 19(3), 298–310.
Summers, B. J. (1980). Negotiable Certiﬁcates of Deposit. Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, Economic Review , 66 (4), 8–19.
Thorp, E. O. (2006). The Kelly Criterion in Blackjack, Sports Betting, and the Stock
Market. In S. A. Zenios & W . T . Ziemba (Eds.), Handbook of Asset and Liability
Management: Theory and Methodology (V ol. 1, pp. 385–428). Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier.
Thorp, E. O., & Kassouf, S. T . (1967). Beat the Market: A Scientiﬁc Stock Market
System. New York, NY: Random House.
Walker, J. (1999). How Big is Global Money Laundering? Journal of Money Laundering
Control, 3(1), 25–37.
Wright, R., T ekin, E., T opalli, V ., McClellan, C., Dickinson, T ., & Rosenfeld, R.
(2017). Less Cash, Less Crime: Evidence from the Electronic Beneﬁt T ransfer
Program. Journal of Law and Economics , 60(2), 361–383.
Yan, X. (2006). The Determinants and Implications of Mutual Fund Cash Holdings:
Theory and Evidence. Financial Management , 35(2), 67–91.
Ysmailov, B. (2017). Interest Rates, Cash and Short-T erm Investments (Working
Paper). Available online: http://www.fmaconferences.org/Boston/Interest_Rates_
Cash_and_ShortT ermInv.pdf
.
Zhang, J. Z., Fargher, N. L., & Hou, W . (2018). Do Banks Audited by Specialists
Engage in Less Real Activities Management? Evidence from Repurchase Agree-

248 Z. Kakushadze and J. A. Serur
ments. AUDITING: A Journal of Practice & Theory (forthcoming). https://doi.org/
10.2308/ajpt-52017.
Zhou, L., Yao, S., Wang, J., & Ou, J. (2016). Global Financial Crisis and China’s
Pawnbroking Industry. Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies , 14 (2),
151–164.